In this lecture, you'll learn how to configure IPv6 global unicast addresses with a lab
demo. Just before I get into that, is another thing I want to tell you about, which is about broadcast
and multicast in IPv6. In IPv4, we can broadcast to all hosts using the
255.255.255.255
destination address. Routers don't forward broadcast traffic by default, so that traffic will hit everything
in the local subnet, but it won't go beyond there.
IPv6 does not support broadcast traffic at all.
It does, however, support multicast to all hosts on the local subnet
using the destination address FF02::1. So that is functionally equivalent to the broadcast
in IPv4. Many services which do use that 255.255.255.2555 broadcast address in IPv4, use a more
specific multicast address in IPv6. For example, if a host sends out a DHCP request, if that's
in IPv4, it gets broadcast.
So it hits all hosts and they all have to process it.
In IPv6, it gets sent to FF05::1:3, which is the DHCP server
multicast address.
So it's only the DHCP servers that are listening for it that will process traffic.
So it makes your broadcast equivalent and your multicast traffic more efficient in IPv6.
OK, onto our actual global unicast address configuration.
So first thing that we need to do is enable IPv6 unicast routing. On your IOS routers,
IPv4 routing is enabled by default but IPv6 is not.
So you have to turn it on. The way you do that
is at global config. Enter the command ipv6 unicast routing.
You're then ready to configure the IPv6 addresses on your interfaces. In IPv4, you would
go to the interface and enter the command ip address and then the IP address. For IPv6,
almost all the commands are the same as they are in IPv4, but rather than saying IP, we say IPv6.
So we configure an address on an interface.
We go to the interface first. In the example here, I've got interface fa0/0 and then the command is IPv6
address.
And the address that you want to enter. To verify the IPv6 addresses on your router, again in
IPv4, we would say
show ip interface brief.
So to check IPv6 addresses,
it's a show ipv6 interface brief.
OK, so let's actually configure this in the lab. So I'll do it using the topology you can see on the
slide here.
Let's go to Putty and I will configure R1.
I'll just leave it in the top right window here so you can see the topology as well. Because IPv6
addresses do get pretty long. It's pretty hard to remember them.
So on R4, I'll go to global configuration, enter IPv6 unicast routing and I'll configure
interface fa2/0 first.
It's going to have IPv6 address 2001:DB8.
Notice that I'm entering it in lower case here.
The IPv6 address is not case sensitive, so it doesn't matter whether it's in capital or lowercase.
Then 0:0::1/64 is my IPv6 address on fa2/0.
That's how you configured it.
You enter the address and then / and then a subnet mask all in one command.
That's the correct syntax. And this is on a router.
So also remember to do a no shutdown on the interface. On our switches,
interfaces are up by default but on routers, they're administratively shut down by default.
So you need to remember, do a no shutdown to bring the interface up.
I'll also configure interface fa0/0 and that is IPv6 address
2001:DB8:0:1::1/64
And a no shutdown.
And to verify it, show ipv6 interface brief and I can see there is the IPv6 address that I configured
on fa0/0 and the address that I configured on fa2/0.
You noticed, there were also these addresses beginning with FE80 as well.
Those are link local addresses. Don't worry about them yet. We'll cover those in another lecture later
in this section.
OK, let's also put an IPv6 address on R2 as well.
So I'll go there and go to global configuration. IPv6 unicast routing. And then on interface
fa0/0, IPv6 address
And what I'll do is I'll put it in the full form of the address. And I won't shorten it at all.
So I'll say IPv6 address
2001:DB8:0:1:0:0:0:2/64
So when you enter the address in the router, you can put in the shortened version or you can put in the long
version. They both mean the same thing and the router doesn't mind. It will take either way.
I do a no shutdown on here. And now,
notice, if I do a show ipv6 interface brief, the router is going to automatically shorten that to the
short version of the address for me.
OK, so that's how we configure our IPv6 addresses on the router.
Once you've done that, the way they work is really the same as it is with IPv4. So all the routing and
switching is basically the same.
But if we want to check connectivity, it's the same way that we do it with IPv4. So IPv4,
I would use a ping. I can use a ping in IPv6 as well.
So from R2, I will ping over to R1 at 2001:DB8:0:1::1
and you see that the ping succeeds.
I could also use a traceroute
exactly the same way that I do with IPv4 as well.
OK, so that was a basic configuration to get IPv6 addresses on our routers.
See you in the next lecture where we're going to get deeper into IPv6.